# Databases

## 1. Introduction

### Types of Databases

- Flat File Databases - [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vAA1VVExV5Q](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vAA1VVExV5Q)
- What is a database - [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tk1t3WKK-ZY](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tk1t3WKK-ZY)

### Setting up Database in Local Machine

Setting up MySQL 8

[Installing on Ubuntu](https://linuxize.com/post/how-to-install-mysql-on-ubuntu-18-04/)

[Installing on Mac](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/mysql-osx-excerpt/5.7/en/osx-installation-pkg.html)

[Installing on Windows](https://www.liquidweb.com/kb/install-mysql-windows/)

Optional : MySQL Workbench

## 2. Relational Databases & SQL

Let's get started with the syntax of SQL and how to manipulate data in the database. You can start going through the SQL lessons in SQLBolt.

Even if you are already familiar with SQL, we recommend that you go through the following lessons in SQLBolt - [https://sqlbolt.com/](https://sqlbolt.com/)

- Fetching data with SELECT
- Queries with constraints using WHERE
- Filtering and sorting
- JOINS
- NULL values
- Creating tables with CREATE
- Adding data to a table with INSERT
- Changing existing data in a table with UPDATE
- Removing data from a table with DELETE

### NULL Values

NULL values can be extremely tricky to deal with. Go through the following article to understand what they mean and how different queries affect NULL values.

### SQL Syntax Differences

SQL, like most programming and scripting languages, has a standard definition for how it should work.

From Wikipedia,
> SQL became a standard of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) in 1986 and of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) in 1987. Since then the standard has been revised to include a larger set of features. Despite the existence of standards, most SQL code requires at least some changes before being ported to different database systems.

The reason why there is a need to make certain changes to SQL code when moving between different relational database systems is that most vendor's database implementation is different. And with those differences also comes a different interpretation of the standards and how they should work.

Another reason is that the SQL standard is vast and often covering just the mandatory standard features in a compliant way is difficult.

Because of these differences, some relational database systems are known to be more standards compliant` than others.

### Comparison of RDBMS (Relational Database Management System)

Because of the differences in standard compliance with different relational database system vendors, we need to understand what the most popular systems in use are, what their advantages and disadvantages are and when to use these systems.

### Database Design and Data Normalization

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tR_rOJPiEXc](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tR_rOJPiEXc)

### Database Design Drills

Normalize Each Of The Following Tables

For each task, create a separate `.sql` file with the create statements for the tables in a GitLab repository and submit the repo.

**DO NOT SUBMIT mysqldump files**. You have to create the tables in the SQL files and submit them directly.

#### Task 1: BRANCH

- Branch#
- Branch_Addr
- ISBN
- Title
- Author
- Publisher
- Num_copies

#### Task 2: CLIENT

- Client#
- Name
- Location
- Manager#
- Manager_name
- Manager_location
- Contract#
- Estimated_cost
- Completion_date
- Staff#
- Staff_name
- Staff_location

#### Task 3: PATIENT

- Patient#
- Name
- DOB
- Address
- Prescription#
- Drug
- Date
- Dosage
- Doctor
- Secretary

#### Task 4 :DOCTOR

- Doctor#
- DoctorName
- Secretary
- Patient#
- PatientName
- PatientDOB
- PatientAddress
- Prescription#
- Drug
- Date
- Dosage

## 3. Using SQL with NodeJS

### Which npm package to choose to connect to the database server?

We choose npm packages to use in our projects based on the following criteria:

1. `Weekly downloads` - The higher the number of downloads, the more we can rely on it since we know that more used packages will often have more solutions available when we search on google.
2. `Last publish` date - The sooner the better because it means that it is still in active development
3. `Documentation` - Good documentation will have a quick start guide, API documentation with parameters and return values as well as sample code.

Along with this, for database packages we also take the following into consideration. Assuming we are using the MySQL 5.7 database for our project:

1. Is there an official package available? If so, then we can choose that package because we know that it will be supported and that the documentation will be good.
2. We should not choose a package that will only work with higher versions of our database server. For example, choosing a package that will only work with MySQL 8.0 will cause a lot of headaches.
3. We should not choose a package that will work with another database only. For example, choosing a package that only works with Postgresql will not work correctly when we are tying to work with MySQL.
4. If the package supports multiple database servers, make sure that it supports the database and the version of the database server we are going to be using.
5. If you want to write raw SQL queries, ensure that the library allows you to do that and is not primarily an ORM.

### ENV Variables and Connection Configuration

An environment refers to the place where you run your project. Javascript often uses an environmental variable to differentiate what environment it is executing in. The name of the env variable that differentiates this is `NODE_ENV`.

Common environments that you will be exposed to are as follows:

* Development environment

   This usually refers to the machine on which you are writing code and building functionality for your projects.

   `NODE_ENV` usually refers to `development` or `dev` or `undefined` when working in this environment.

* Production environment

   This usually refers to the machine or cloud virtual machine on which you deploy your project for users or customers to interact with and work on.

   `NODE_ENV` usually refers to `production` when working in this environment.

   Setting this value will often result in a lot of libraries and modules running optimizations on their code. These optimizations include things such as preventing all debug statements from executing, reducing the size of the build file, and so on. The purpose of these optimizations is to improve the speed of loading and execution of your code.

* Staging environment

   This usually refers to the machine on which you deploy your project for internal testing of functionality to occur before the current set of changes is deployed to production.

   `NODE_ENV` usually refers to `staging` when working in this environment.

   Usually, there are no optimizations that occur when the value is set to this so that errors can be easily traced if they occur.

* Testing environment

   This usually refers to the machine on which you run automated tests on your project to ensure that all your existing functionality still works and that the current set of changes has not broken anything. A good example of automated testing is the test cases that run on HackerRank when you complete a problem on that platform.

   `NODE_ENV` usually refers to `testing` when working in this environment.

   Often there are no optimizations that occur when the value is set to this so that errors can be easily traced if they occur. The testing environment can be run on your local machine before pushing to a git repository. It can also be setup in an automated testing environment via a CI/CD pipeline if it has been set up for the project.

#### Setting Environmental Variables

Learn how to set environmental variables by reading [this article](https://linuxize.com/post/how-to-set-and-list-environment-variables-in-linux/)

#### How To Manage Configuration For Different Environments?

Because we have different possible environments, we have to configure our code to connect to different database in each of these environments.

The reason behind this is that we cannot expect our code on production to connect to the database that we have installed on our local machine.

Similarly, when running tests, we would not want tests to run on live data from customers directly on production.

In order to manage this difference in connection configuration for each of these environments, there are two ways we can go about doing it.

In the first way, we can create a `config.js` file. We would then read the value of the database connection string directly from the env variable.

Alternately, we could take the value of `NODE_ENV` into consideration and then use some logic to decide which database to connect to. The caveat here is that we **must never hard-code secrets** such as database passwords, etc into our `config.js` file. That is what env variables are for.

However, we can hard-code fallback or default values such as a default port number to connect to since the database port number hardly ever changes or a default database name, etc. **But never hard-code secrets!**

The second way to manage this would be to use a library to manage all of our configuration based on a `.env` file. This file would have different values on different environments so we would not have to worry about writing logic to handle different environments.

You can learn how to do both of these methods by following the instructions mentioned in the article below.

## 4. Intermediate Topics

- SQL Injection
- Pools and pooling

## 5. ORM

### What is an ORM?

[What is an ORM and Why You Should Use it](https://blog.bitsrc.io/what-is-an-orm-and-why-you-should-use-it-b2b6f75f5e2a)

[Popular ORMs for NodeJS](https://www.dunebook.com/best-node-js-orms/)

### Advantages & Disadvantages of an ORM

#### Advantages

- Gives you a standard and consistent way to write SQL queries without worrying about code style.

- Improves the speed of development. Your code also becomes easier to update, maintain, and reuse since you can write queries using native javascript objects.

- Gives you the ability to protect your queries from SQL injection attacks.

- You can write correct and optimized SQL code without worrying about the SQL language and how the queries have to be structured.

- ORM Models follow the DRY principle which means that you only have to write your model once. It then becomes easier to update and maintain all your code because of this one module.

- Most ORM Models use OOP, which means that you can extend and inherit from models and extend functionality easily.

- Some ORMs let you switch between database vendors easily so porting between two different database systems becomes seamless.


#### Disadvantages

- ORMs have their own syntax so learning that takes time.

- Small misconfigurations in how you use the ORM can lead to massive performance issues.

- Performance is reasonable for commonly run and simpler queries. When you have to do things like performing joins on multiple tables, use derived tables, or run complex aggregations, it is better to do so with raw SQL queries.

- Documentation for some ORMs is difficult to navigate even if they are the most commonly used libraries.

### Sequelize ORM

[https://www.npmjs.com/package/sequelize](https://www.npmjs.com/package/sequelize)
